Incomplete first pass on comment spec (#52)
omnibor/spec: spec/SPEC-annex-C-source-embedding.md

Annex B contains a method of embedding an Input Manifest Identifier into source code files files.

### Embedded Input Manifest Identifier

Most source code files are hand coded by humans.  Some however are generated from other input(s) by a build tool.

A build tool outputing a source code file may embed the Input Manifest Identifier for the output source code file into
the output source code file by adding a comment line containing a string of the form:

``` OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID: [ ${comma separated list of Input Manifest Identifier URIs} ]
```

For a file with C commenting semantics (like C, C++, Java, Go, etc) a concrete example might be:

```// OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID: [ gitoid:blob:sha1:261eeb9e9f8b2b4b0d119366dda99c6fd7d35c64, gitoid:blob:sha256:09c825ac02df9150e4f93d12ba1da5d1ff5846c3e62503c814aa3a300c535772 ]
```

For a file with shell commenting semantics (like a shell script, Python, etc) a concrete example might be:
```# OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID: [ gitoid:blob:sha1:261eeb9e9f8b2b4b0d119366dda99c6fd7d35c64, gitoid:blob:sha256:09c825ac02df9150e4f93d12ba1da5d1ff5846c3e62503c814aa3a300c535772 ]
```

### Placement of OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID Comment Line

> The OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID comment line should be placed before the first non-comment, non-blank text in the file.

Reviewer: I think we can consider this resolved based on further discussion. Appending to the end of the file, possibly overwriting prior entries, is the decided-on design.

## Annex C

> Annex B contains a method of embedding an Input Manifest Identifier into source code files files.

Author: ```suggestion
Annex C contains a method of embedding an Input Manifest Identifier into source code files files.
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/omnibor/spec/pull/52/commits/115e1111fd41688b6af8ba2855f1184bc1a4c98b

the output source code file by adding a comment line containing a string of the form:

``` OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID: [ ${comma separated list of Input Manifest Identifier URIs} ]
```

For a file with C commenting semantics (like C, C++, Java, Go, etc) a concrete example might be:

```// OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID: [ gitoid:blob:sha1:261eeb9e9f8b2b4b0d119366dda99c6fd7d35c64, gitoid:blob:sha256:09c825ac02df9150e4f93d12ba1da5d1ff5846c3e62503c814aa3a300c535772 ]
```

For a file with shell commenting semantics (like a shell script, Python, etc) a concrete example might be:
```# OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID: [ gitoid:blob:sha1:261eeb9e9f8b2b4b0d119366dda99c6fd7d35c64, gitoid:blob:sha256:09c825ac02df9150e4f93d12ba1da5d1ff5846c3e62503c814aa3a300c535772 ]
```

### Placement of OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID Comment Line

The OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID comment line should be placed before the first non-comment, non-blank text in the file.  The OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID comment line should be proceeded and followed by a blank line to insure it is not interpretted as part of another comment block.

> A subsequent build tool reading the source code file should interpret the first such comment line it encounters in the file as being the Input Manifest Identifier, and ignore subsequent comment lines in the file which may contain Input Manifest Identifiers.

Author: ```suggestion
A subsequent build tool reading the source code file should interpret the last such comment line it encounters in the file as being the Input Manifest Identifier, and ignore previous comment lines in the file which may contain Input Manifest Identifiers.
```

Author: Alternate proposal that may be easier for implementers:

- Append OmniBOR comment line to the end of the file.

Reviewer: We should probably also make sure our tooling provides an easy way to answer the question: what is the `OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID` of this file, to enable debugging / assumption checking for people using OmniBOR in practice (meaning: you can check that it's concluding the ID is the one you expect).

Author: @alilleybrinker Could you say more... how are you envisioning that the ID is the one you expect?

Reviewer: Okay, imagining we have an `omnibor` CLI, it would be nice to be able to do something like (ignore the specifics of the API design implied here):

```sh
$ omnibor manifest-id <file>
```

Which would print the "winning" manifest ID from the file. You could also, in theory, do:

```sh
$ omnibor manifest-id --all <file>
```

Which would print the full listing of ID's found in the file, in order. Maybe even also have:

```sh
$ omnibor manifest-id --all --line-numbers <file>
```

Which would print the same as `--all`, but with the line number of each ID prepended.

---

With these above commands existing, users could then debug surprising OmniBOR behavior (for example, the artifact ID's of two things not being equal when they believe they should be).

Example:

If the input source code file begins with:

```go
// Code generated by stringer DO NOT EDIT.

import (
    "fmt"
)
```

the output source code file should look like:
```go
// Code generated by stringer DO NOT EDIT.

// OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID: [ gitoid:blob:sha1:261eeb9e9f8b2b4b0d119366dda99c6fd7d35c64, gitoid:blob:sha256:09c825ac02df9150e4f93d12ba1da5d1ff5846c3e62503c814aa3a300c535772 ]

import (
    "fmt"
)
```

if the input source code file begins with:

```c
/*
 * Copyright 2023 Yoyodyne Inc
 * SPDX-License-Identifier: 
 */

 /* OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID: [ gitoid:blob:sha1:261eeb9e9f8b2b4b0d119366dda99c6fd7d35c64, gitoid:blob:sha256:09c825ac02df9150e4f93d12ba1da5d1ff5846c3e62503c814aa3a300c535772 ] */

#include <stdio.h>
int main() {
   // printf() displays the string inside quotation
   printf("Hello, World!");
   return 0;
}
```

### Tools which mutate existing source code files

Many source code generation tools, like patch, specifically mutate an existing input source code file which may contain
an existing OmniBOR-Input-Manifest comment.  In such circumstances the tool should either

1. Replace an existing OmniBOR-Input-Manifest comment if found

> 2. Insert the OmniBOR-Input-Manifest normally, which will cause it to be placed *after* the existing OmniBOR-Input-Manifest comment line.

Author: There is some feeling that about 'replacement' is preferable to appending.

## Annex C

> Annex C contains a method of embedding an Input Manifest Identifier into source code files files.

Reviewer: "files files" -> "files"

### Embedded Input Manifest Identifier

Most source code files are hand coded by humans.  Some however are generated from other input(s) by a build tool.

A build tool outputing a source code file may embed the Input Manifest Identifier for the output source code file into
the output source code file by adding a comment line containing a string of the form:

> ``` OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID: [ ${comma separated list of Input Manifest Identifier URIs} ]

Reviewer: GitHub doesn't appear to like these inline triple-backticked code blocks. If the intent is for a codeblock to be inline, it should use single-backticks. If it the intent is for it to be a non-inline codeblock, then the triple backticks should each appear on their own lines.

Also, when we say "comma separated" we should clarify the spacing rules (if any).

Author: > Also, when we say "comma separated" we should clarify the spacing rules (if any).

Proposed fix in 09a479ae8ff6b335cfe6412aa6446f92d29e319e

```

For a file with C commenting semantics (like C, C++, Java, Go, etc) a concrete example might be:

```// OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID: [ gitoid:blob:sha1:261eeb9e9f8b2b4b0d119366dda99c6fd7d35c64, gitoid:blob:sha256:09c825ac02df9150e4f93d12ba1da5d1ff5846c3e62503c814aa3a300c535772 ]

> ```

Author: How would this interact with 80 char line limits in some linters?  

Should the opening and closing square brackets be present even if there is only a single hash?

Author: Consensus is that we should always have the opening and closing square brackets even if there is only a single hash.

For a file with shell commenting semantics (like a shell script, Python, etc) a concrete example might be:
```# OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID: [ gitoid:blob:sha1:261eeb9e9f8b2b4b0d119366dda99c6fd7d35c64, gitoid:blob:sha256:09c825ac02df9150e4f93d12ba1da5d1ff5846c3e62503c814aa3a300c535772 ]
```

### Placement of OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID Comment Line

> The OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID comment line should be placed as the last line in the source code file.  The OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID comment line should be proceeded by a blank line to insure it is not interpretted as part of another comment block.

Reviewer: "proceeded" -> "preceded"
"insure" -> "ensure"

Author: Fixed in 186727658709bec5d211527d0a42469e25d9c888

A tool reading the source code file should interpret the last OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID comment line it encounters in the file as being the Input Manifest Identifier, and ignore previous comment lines in the file which may contain Input Manifest Identifiers.

Example:

If the input source code file begins with:

```go
// Code generated by stringer DO NOT EDIT.

import (
    "fmt"
)
...
```

> the output source code file should look like:

Reviewer: "the" -> "The"

```go
// Code generated by stringer DO NOT EDIT.

import (
    "fmt"
)
...

// OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID: [ gitoid:blob:sha1:261eeb9e9f8b2b4b0d119366dda99c6fd7d35c64, gitoid:blob:sha256:09c825ac02df9150e4f93d12ba1da5d1ff5846c3e62503c814aa3a300c535772 ]
```

> if the input source code file begins with:

Reviewer: "if" -> "If"

```c
/*
 * Copyright 2023 Yoyodyne Inc
 * SPDX-License-Identifier: 
 */

#include <stdio.h>
int main() {
   // printf() displays the string inside quotation
   printf("Hello, World!");
   return 0;
}
```

> the output source code file should look like:

Reviewer: "the" -> "The"

```c
/*
 * Copyright 2023 Yoyodyne Inc
 * SPDX-License-Identifier: 
 */

#include <stdio.h>
int main() {
   // printf() displays the string inside quotation
   printf("Hello, World!");
   return 0;
}

//* OmniBOR-Input-Manifest-ID: [ gitoid:blob:sha1:261eeb9e9f8b2b4b0d119366dda99c6fd7d35c64, gitoid:blob:sha256:09c825ac02df9150e4f93d12ba1da5d1ff5846c3e62503c814aa3a300c535772 ] */
```

### Tools which mutate existing source code files

> Many source code generation tools, like patch, specifically mutate an existing input source code file which may contain

Reviewer: Related: we should probably put out some guidance for how to deal with tools which don't fixup OmniBOR manifest identifiers themselves when they make edits, perhaps by guiding people to check for fixups, and providing some standard tool(s) to perform fixups on a per-language basis.
